### Build Contents Diff RFC 

## Context
In order to make decisions about what to do with any given build generated by kpack, users need to compare a new build’s contents with the contents of other builds.

## Goals
Create a new command, `kp build diff`, for printing the difference between two builds. The command will take one required argument and two optional arguments.
 
Examples:
`kp build diff image-name`
Compares the two most recent builds
`kp build diff image-name build-tag-1`
Compares the most recent build with the specified build or external image
`kp build diff image-name build-tag-1 build-tag-2`
Compares the two specified builds or external images
 
Three use cases that this feature should ideally satisfy:
- As a DevOps engineer, when I see a new build has been created in a lower environment, I want to evaluate what benefit it provides to my team for me to promote this build to an upper environment (given the risk that any change implicitly represents). 
- As a DevOps engineer or App Developer, when I am told there is a problem with a specific build (new build failing in CI or old build failing in production), I want to know what’s different about the problem build than the last one that worked. 
- As an App Developer, I want to see the difference between the commit I built locally with pack yesterday and the build that kpack built for me today based on my commit. 
 
Implications: 
- Because the user will need to compare their most recent build or image to the build in production which is older, builds being compared will be non-adjacent 
- Because the builds are non-adjacent, many things are likely to have changed in the contents and there will have been many “Reasons” that caused the intervening builds. Therefore, it doesn’t make a lot of sense to print the “Reason” as part of the diff
- I assume that it is easy / possible for users to access the tag or digest associated with a container in production (perhaps there is another build identifier we could use?)


## Prior Art 
Differences from the reason diff RFC that’s been added to `kp build status`:
- COMMIT can be depicted in the same way
- CONFIG is the same
- BUILDPACK is different because it prints the Bill of Materials which represents the results of the buildpacks used instead of only the buildpack/s that caused the new build to kick off
- STACK is the same now, but will be different once we have more stack metadata such as the dpackage list (and someday a CVE list) that we can print
 
Competitor examples: 
https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/container-diff

## Complexity/Risks
- Would this be helpful for diagnosing failed builds or builds that don't start? If so, how can we surface this info without a BoM being generated? 
- How does all this show up in CI, if at all? 

## Mockups 
- Lines preceded by + or - will be bolded and colored green or red respectively 
- Added a table as a header to the diff output that gives context on name, date/time, and tags for the two images (in case you diff builds from two different images)
- CONFIG CHANGES includes the 5 lines above and below the diff
- BILL OF MATERIALS (BUILDPACKS) CHANGES prints only info on the buildpacks that have changed 
- STACK CHANGES includes a diff of mix-ins if they change version names
 
------------------
``` 
$kp build diff petclinic index.docker.io/username/instance@sha256:fsdgh39478th0g9tuisodfhgvns938e54iunwuiehfasf9wgiauwsfx

IMAGE NAME        BUILD TIME                 LATEST IMAGE 
petclinic         2020-08-04 10:12:46        index.docker.io/username/instance@sha256:afdsniuubadsiugbn3784htw70835qioresgkdjfvba3493w8uiebgd
petclinic         2020-09-08 12:08:36        index.docker.io/username/instance@sha256:fsdgh39478th0g9tuisodfhgvns938e54iunwuiehfasf9wgiauwsfx

------------------------------

COMMIT CHANGES
- Revision: 234890hpe9vjsr8gse98rghser
+ Revision: 43t789wghges87h540eq8378ge
 
CONFIG CHANGES
  env:
  - name: "JAVA_BP_ENV"
    value: "value"
  resources:
    requests:
-     cpu: "0.25"
+     cpu: "0.5"
      memory: "128M"
    limits:
      cpu: "0.5"
      memory: "256M"
 
BILL OF MATERIALS (BUILDPACKS) CHANGES
local:
- buildpack:
    id: org.cloudfoundry.openjdk
    version: 1.0.0-RC03
  metadata:
    licenses:
    - type: GPL-2.0 WITH Classpath-exception-2.0
      uri: https://openjdk.java.net/legal/gplv2+ce.html
    name: OpenJDK JDK
    sha256: 90c33cf3f2ed0bd773f648815de7347e69cfbb3416ef3bf41616ab1c4aa0f5a8
    stacks:
    - io.buildpacks.stacks.bionic
    - org.cloudfoundry.stacks.cflinuxfs3
    uri: https://github.com/AdoptOpenJDK/openjdk11-binaries/releases/download/jdk-11.0.4%!B(MISSING)11/OpenJDK11U-jdk_x64_linux_hotspot_11.0.4_11.tar.gz
  name: openjdk-jdk
-  version: 11.0.4
+  version: 11.0.5

STACK CHANGES
- RunImage: index.docker.io/paketobuildpacks/run@sha256:34978twgsui4789et0wh9384erhsg0e798riuhgs0er7iugshe98riugeh99rgaser892
+ RunImage: index.docker.io/paketobuildpacks/run@sha256:fh34578tg29wb645rwhs87e5hrw0e98jtfnws9e7w378qe49tr3g39n5gwe9u5hge549w

Mixins:
- libgts-0.7-4
+ libgts-0.7-5
```

## Alternatives
1. Add information about build contents diff to the kp build status command
  - Pros:
   - Reduce the CLI surface area 
   - May be a more intuitive location
  - Cons:
   - Makes a command with long output even longer 

2. Print / pipe out two YAML or JSON files that represent the build contents and allow the user to diff them with the tool of their choice 
  - Pros:
   - Export two image digests and compare them 
  - Cons: 
   - More work for the user

3. Everything the same as the proposal, except hide most of the output behind a verbose flag 
 
4. Deliver a feature like this as part of a separate tool:
- Registry  
- `Pack`

## Appendix
There are five reasons a build will have been generated and each has a different fidelity of information that we can provide to our users: 

COMMIT
If the image in question is built with source code in a git repository, there will be a SHA associated with the commit which can be used to look up in Github/etc the commit that resulted in the build. 
This doesn’t provide any semantic value in and of itself, but it provides a pointer to semantic value 

CONFIG
We can print a diff of the two image config files (if anything has changed). This will show info about how environment variables, source code, and image settings are different between the two builds. Changes in environment variables may represent changes to the contents of the build because they may specify a dependency version to be used. 

STACK
Today we can only print old and new stack image URLs, nothing about what is actually in the stacks
This means that we can’t satisfy use case 1 for this variation, since nothing meaningful will show up in the diff itself and because it requires the user to do a pretty involved task: download the two stack images and extract their dpackage lists and then diff them, or manually read the release notes to infer the differences in the stacks that might benefit them
Since we hypothesize that stack updates are where most users will find initial and frequent value, the absence of meaningful stack information is a significant blocker to this feature delivering value.
I assume this limitation would have no bearing on use case 2 because ABI compatibility should ensure that a stack update is never the cause of a build error 
 
BUILDPACK
Today we have a couple options for showing buildpack differences: the buildpacks used list from `kp build status` and the Bill of Materials from the lifecycle. 
One restriction of the Bill of Materials is that only the Java Paketo buildpacks have rich and thoughtful metadata today. The Paketo team has not yet invested in BoM metadata for the other metabuildpacks for other languages. 
It’s unclear to me today to what extent the Bill of Materials really makes clear what dependencies have been installed in the container. I need some help to validate this 
The Bill of Materials is a JSON file. This could theoretically be converted into a nice tabular format, but since the data types associated with each buildpack object in the JSON are arbitrary, this would be hard to maintain / cover all use cases. Instead, I recommend we simply choose a JSON pretty print tool and use that layout. 

TRIGGER
This is not relevant to a build contents diff since it shouldn’t have any bearing on the contents of the build. 
 
 
 
 
 
